[Music]
so we humans like to think that we know
about and can control everything that
happens on our planet and how's that
working for us yeah control over the
elements is far from the truth because
right now somewhere above our heads in
addition to climate change the Earth's
magnetic field keeps weakening at an
alarming speed and the region that
concerns scientists more than any other
is called the South Atlantic anomaly but
let's start from the very beginning in
1958 American student James Van Alen
discovered that there are two radiation
belts circling our planet these belts
appear when radioactive particles from
the Sun as well as cosmic rays got
trapped in the magnetic field of our
planet this means that the belts powered
by the magnetic field also known as the
magnetosphere who protect the Earth from
destruction but more about that later
for now the main character of our story
is the Earth's magnetic field itself and
it's having big problems now the truth
is that our planet's magnetic field has
been weakening and this process started
more than a thousand years ago the
situation is so serious that scientists
don't deny that one day the Earth's
magnetic poles may simply flip with
North becoming South and vice versa
although it may sound scary and
confusing this phenomenon has been
happening throughout the history of our
planet the last time it occurred was
approximately 780,000 years ago experts
are still not sure if such a flip is
imminent this time because it's not an
instant change nope it's a long process
that might suddenly reverse like it
happened 40,000 years ago when earth was
close to renaming its North Pole to the
South why nowadays the region that
worries scientists the most is the South
Atlantic anomaly a vast region
stretching from zimbabwe to chile the
magnetic field in this area is so weak
that is dangerous for satellites to
as you remember the magnetosphere
protects Earth from radiation thus a
weak magnetic field means additional
hazardous radiation which in turn can
lead to disruption in satellites
electronics in fact in recent decades
the South Atlantic anomaly has already
caused several computer crashes on
shuttles and even the International
Space Station that's why when the latter
passes through the anomaly it needs
extra shielding what's more after the
Hubble Space Telescope enters this
anomalous zone it stops taking
observations and doesn't resume its work
until it leaves the region the SpaceX
CRX one Dragon spacecraft almost went
out of control in October 2012 attached
to the International Space Station it
had serious problems while passing
through the magnetic anomaly but luckily
those issues were short-lived but the
next spacecraft wasn't that fortunate in
Japan's had tomy x-ray Observatory which
was the most powerful cutting-edge
satellite was traveling through the
region its aim was to study supernovas
and black holes but the South Atlantic
anomaly disrupted its direction finding
mechanisms and as a result the satellite
had to rely only on gyroscopes to find
its way unfortunately they weren't
working properly and the Observatory
spun itself apart the truth is that
people have known about the changes in
the magnetosphere for quite some time
but no one was sure if it was an anomaly
or a perfectly usual pattern that had
existed for millions of years well it
turned out that people did have reason
to worry
recently scientists have found a way to
study the changes in the magnetosphere
of our planet and the results are more
than alarming but let me tell you about
the band two people first it was a tribe
of ancient africans who lived in the
region of the Limpopo River Valley
nowadays this area borders with Botswana
is in Bob way and South Africa and is
located inside the South Atlantic
anomaly about a thousand years ago
during droughts the Bantu people
conducted
and intriguing ritual they burned their
own clay huts hoping that rain would
come after such sacrifice but when the
clay burned at very high temperatures it
stabilized the magnetic materials in it
that's why when the substance cooled
down these minerals hardened according
to the planet's magnetic field pattern
no wonder modern scientists were
ecstatic about the discovery since it
allowed them to learn more about the
magnetic field anomaly and its behavior
and guess what they found out that the
process of the weakening of the
magnetosphere started long ago the clay
patterns even specified the definite
periods 400 to 450 C 700 to 750 c e and
1225 to 1550 c-e-o it's getting closer
and closer to our time to make a long
story shorter it appears as if something
hidden deep under africa is affecting
the magnetic field of the whole planet
and scientists may have finally figured
out what it could be at least the
current weakening of the Earth's
magnetosphere which started around 160
years ago seems to be connected to a
huge reservoir of super dense rock that
sits a whopping 1,800 miles under the
continent some experts claim that the
thing might be tens of millions of years
old and thousands of miles wide but how
can some Rock interfere with a magnetic
field of the entire planet the thing is
that this rock is located right between
the boiling outer core of our planet
which consists of liquid iron and nickel
and the Earth's mantle which is much
stiffer and cooler as a result this
monster of a Boulder may be disturbing
the layer of iron which is the very
force that helps to create the planet's
magnetic field and even though the pole
reversal I've told you about could start
anywhere in the Earth's core places like
the South Atlantic anomaly are the most
likely sources of the dramatic changes
some people believe that when South
turns north our planet will suffer a lot
of catastrophic events they say the
continents will start to lurch in
different directions and
it'll trigger ruinous earthquakes the
extinction of species and climate
changes hmm however there's no proof
that the consequences of the pole
reversal are going to be that disastrous
plus scientists are still not sure
whether the pole reversal will happen at
all since the events of the most recent
160 years can be just a part of a bigger
scale pattern but let's imagine the
worst case scenario what if earth lost
its magnetic field altogether what would
happen then well first all compasses
would go awry and start doing weird
things the reason for that is the nature
of these devices which are nothing more
than tiny magnets and like any magnet
they use Earth's magnetic fields to
align themselves with our planet's
magnetic field gone compasses wouldn't
align north to south anymore even a
small piece of magnetic rock would be
able to make your compass show the wrong
direction or start to wander without
magnetic fields birds would stop their
seasonal migrations they use Earth's
magnetic field for navigation just like
many other creatures like sea turtles
honeybees lobsters and some species of
fish so let's say the magnetic field
disappeared in this case migrating birds
wouldn't know where to fly and they
might not survive the winter
now on top of that without Earth's
magnetic field you might never again see
aurora borealis or as they're called
northern and southern lights the upper
atmosphere of our planet would be
exposed to powerful solar winds and the
breathtaking phenomenon wouldn't be as
bright as it is now but those wouldn't
be the worst consequences of the
disappearance of Earth's magnetic field
no no no the truth is that without it
well we might not survive at all our
magnetic field protects the planet from
being bombarded by streams of deadly
radioactive particles if they reach the
Earth's surface people would be in real
danger see for yourself
astronauts on lunar missions told about
flashes of Lights they saw when they
close their eyes it happened after
cosmic rays had been passing through
their retinas for some time and later it
led to cataracts so if the magnetic
field disappears
cosmic rays would bombard our bodies
causing serious diseases such as cancer
and even changing our DNA along with
health issues technology would suffer as
well initially people would lose control
over satellites which would get damaged
by solar storms without the
magnetosphere power grids computers and
other electronics wouldn't be protected
even from the weakest of solar storms
and it just gets better the outcome of
losing the magnetic field would be the
disappearance of the air we breathe and
the solar wind would be the one to blame
this wind is so powerful that it would
easily rip the planet's atmosphere off
it's gases as a result all the water on
earth would evaporate leaving the planet
bare and lifeless well thankfully even
if it were to happen it would be a long
time from now and scientists are
launching more satellite zone to further
understand the Earth's magnetic field
now it's your turn
do you think our planet will eventually
lose its attraction I mean its magnetic
field or perhaps people will manage to
solve this issue with the help of the
newest technologies let me
down in the comments if you learned
something new today then give this video
a like and share with a friend but hey
don't go flipping your poles just yet we
have over 2,000 cool videos for you to
check out all you have to do is pick the
left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life